List types of OS
Mainframe, Server, Parallel Computer, Personal Computer, Real-time, Embedded, (Smart card)
Three levels of Monolithic OS
Main Procedure, Service Routines, Utility Resources
Diff between Micro kernel and Monolithic kernel?
micro kernel only holds privileged code, easier to rebuild process server, but slower due to context switches
Process states
created, ready, running, blocked, exit
How does a batch schedule work?
Pick a process, run to completion, pick new Process
How does the OS know when to interrupt a process?
interrupt timer in hardware
A PTE keeps track of...
Process management, file management, memory management
PTE process management keeps track of...
registers, program counter, cpu status word, stack pointer, process state, PID, parent PID, signals, process start time, total cpu usage
PTE File management keeps track of...
root directory, working dir, file descriptors, user ID, group ID
PTE memory management keeps track of...
pointers to text, data, stack OR pointer to page table
Definition of a Thread:
A stream of instructions and their associated state
Thread state: what are the per process items?
address space, open files, child processes, signals & handlers, accounting info, global variables
Thread state: what are the per thread items?
program counter, registers, stack & stack pointer, state
difference between cpu bound and i/o bound...
cpu bound processes spend most of their time computing, i/o spend most time waiting or blocked
Parts of 3-level scheduling:
arriving jobs go to input queue, admission sched loads them to main mem, memory sched moves jobs from disk to/from main mem, cpu scheduler moves jobs from main mem to/from cpu
define fairness
Comparable processes get comparable Service
what is throughput and how do we compute it?
number of jobs completed per unit time, #jobs/total time
what is avg turnaround and how do we compute?
avg time from job submission to job completion, total time/#jobs
two types of batch schedules:
first come first served, shortest job first
Interactive scheduling algorithms:
round robin, priority sched, "shortest process next", guaranteed sched, lottery, fair share
What is guaranteed scheduling?
N processes get 1/N CPU time
what is fair share scheduling?
N users get 1/N CPU time
What is a Mechanism?
the way something is done (algorithm)
what is Policy?
the rules a particular mechanism should follow
advantages/disadvantages of user threading?
creating threads is function call, faster. can cause a process to be greedy without voluntary yields
advantages/disadvantages of kernel threading?
creating thread is system call, slower. does not need yields
types of system calls?
process control, file manipulation, device manipulation, info maintenance, communication, security
Critical region goals:
No two processes can be in their critical region at the same time, no process outside CR may block another process, no process should have to wait forever to enter CR
Critical Regions are meant to prevent...
race conditions
Peterson's Solution handles race conditions using...
Busy waiting - do nothing, wait for interrupt
Whats a mutex?
A simplified version of a semaphore that can only be locked or unlocked
Try to explain a semaphore... :(
it has a value, if value > 0 there are more wakeups than sleeps, 2 functions down(), which decrements and possibly sleeps if val < 0, up() increments and possibly wakeup
explain producer/consumer using semaphores
3 semaphores: empty(n) - empty spaces; full(0) - full spaces; mutex(1) - down is enter_cr, up is leave_cr;
What is deadlock?
A set of processes is deadlocked if each process is waiting for an event that only another process can cause
4 conditions for deadlock:
mutual exclusion (resource); Hold & wait (process); No preemption (resource); circular wait
Why can Critical Regions cause deadlock?
They are mutually exclusive & not preempt-able
4 strategies for dealing with deadlock:
ignore; detect & recover; avoid (possible, but we don't allow it); prevent (DL is impossible)
What's the stupid Ostrich algorithm?
do nothing.
When is a good time to run a Deadlock detection algorithm?
When system is not busy (maybe idle); run it with low priority?
Resource trajectories are used to...
Avoid deadlock
What's a safe state?
There exists a schedule that will NOT lead to deadlock
Describe the Banker's Algorithm
its a (batch) scheduling algorithm that avoids deadlock by estimating required resources
two ways to prevent deadlock
spooling and global numbering
what is a page?
a contiguous range of virtual addresses, typically 4kb
what is a page frame?
the contiguous range of physical addresses pointed to by a page
explain the MMU algorithm
VA / page size -> page#; PT[page#] -> frame#; frame# * page size -> PA(start); PA(start) + offset(VA%pagesize) = real PA 
What are Overlays?
hand-written dynamic loading of subsets of a program's code and data
define Virtual Memory
Attempt to simulate more memory than exists on the system through automatic "overlays"
parts of a Page Table Entry:
protection, dirty bit, referenced bit, valid bit, page frame number
What's a translation lookaside buffer?
Cache for Page Table Entries
What's an Inverted Page Table?
Instead of a PTE per page, make one per frame
Two functions of an OS:
Manage resources, abstract details
4 resources managed by OS
CPU time, Memory, I/O devices, security
memory heirarchy (fastest to slowest):
registers, cache (SRAM), main memory (DRAM), magnetic disk, magnetic tape